README.md, before:

# git-playground

This repo and its content has only one purpose: **to learn, to test and to
train git**. It does so by featuring pre-built branches with example content
laid out in a way that use cases can be played through before applying them to
the "real life" problems.

Additional content is very welcome. Just fork and create two new branches:

* One branch with changes this this README with the new use cases. This is then merge
  to `main` via a PR
* Another branch for the example data to work on if needed. This won't get merged
  but protected.

## Use Cases

### Clean Up Feature Branches

Working on a new feature on a feature branch is often a journey with hopefully
lots of commits to be able to try things and to go back if needed. There are
commits with new code, those that fix typos, with commits that partially revert
previous changes - over all - probably a medium to big mess. And hey, that's
perfectly fine. Nobody creates production code right away.

I hear you yelling: "But this messy branch gets merged using Squash and Merge
anyway! Then why bother at all?"

If all of the changes belong together and therefore are related, then you may be
correct, BUT even then, think about the person that has to dig through you
feature branch doing a review. 20 commits working on 15 files with multiple
changes on the same lines is a real burden for a reviewer and takes a lot of
time. At the very least, make the life of the reviewer easier and be a guidance
through your commit history. Commits like "fix typo", "add missing file" and the
like only distract the work for the reviewer. Clean it up and have a bunch of
meaningful commits that enables the reviewer discover the forest instead of the
individual tree. Sure, this is more work for you, the developer, but you know
your work in and out, the reviewer does not yet.

Find in this repo a branch `learn-rebasing-easy` to play around with interactive
rebasing. This tool allows you to rewrite the git history in every manner you
like. Please be aware, you are rewriting the history for everybody, so do this
only on work that others to not rely on. Typically, you only do this on your own
feature branches or on commits in `main` **that are not yet pushed to remote aka
made public**. But with branch protection on the `main` branch, this shouldn't
happen anyway. ;-)

**Task 1**: Go ahead, checkout `learn-rebasing-easy` and try to make the branch look
like this:

    A---B---C---D  learn-rebasing-easy

**Keep in mind**: Never ever rewrite history on branches/code that is already
published aka pushed and probably used by others.

There are [plenty of video tutorials on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=git+rebasing)
about this topic, one short I like is [this one](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AFpqO_7LfjQ)
([typecraft_dev](https://www.youtube.com/@typecraft_dev) has a lot of interesting
sort videos, especially on Neovim).

### I Accidentally Committed to Wrong Branch

#### Symptom

You forgot to create the feature branch or to checkout the correct feature
branch and you now have created one or even several commits on the wrong branch,
probably `main`? Let's assume `main` for the cases below.  
How to get these commits over to the correct branch?

#### Discussion and Solution

We have to distinguish two cases here:

**Case 1:** If you forgot to create the new feature branch before working on the
new feature, things are simple to fix.

    A---B---C---D---E  main

Let's assume that commits D and E above should have gone into the feature branch
`my-feature`. So, we have to achieve that D and E go onto the new feature branch
and then `main` can be rolled back to C, right?

The current state above is actually already what you wanted on the feature
branch, rigth? Well, then let's check out this state as the new feature branch.

    git checkout -b my-feature

The repo now looks like this:

    A---B---C---D---E  main, my-feature

The only thing left to do is to remove D and E from `main` AKA roll back `main` by
two commits:

    git checkout main
    git reset --hard HEAD~2

Now, the repo looks like this - exactly what we wanted in the first place:

    A---B---C  main
             \
              D---E  my-feature

**Case 2**
Now, if the feature branch already exists and has work on it, we have to
append those wrong commits to the correct feature branch. It again makes sense
to distinguish two cases:

**a)** if you only have one commit that needs to be moved over, use cherry
picking:

    git log # remember the commit hash of the wrong commit
    git checkout my-feature
    git cherry-pick <commit hash>
    git checkout main
    git reset --hard HEAD~1    # or HEAD^, which is the same

**b)** You have several commits to get moved from one branch to another, use
`git rebase`. An example might look like this:

    A---B---C---G---H---I  main
             \
              D---E---E  my-feature

The changes in G, H and I should have been committed to the branch `my-feature`
instead of `main`. Damn!  
First create a temporary branch for these commits: `git checkout -b my-temp`

The situation now looks like this:

    A---B---C---G---H---I  main, my-temp
             \
              D---E---E  my-feature

Now reset `main` to where it should be, C in the example:

    git reset --hard HEAD~3

The situation now looks like this:

    A---B---C  main
            |\
            | G---H---I  my-temp
            |
             \
              D---E---F  my-feature

Now we can rebase the branch my-temp onto the branch my-feature:

    # First checkout the branch to move
    git co my-temp

    # Now rebse the current branch from the old the new branch:
    git rebase --onto my-feature main

The situation now looks like this:

    A---B---C  main
             \
              D---E---F  my-feature
                       \
                        G'---H'---I'  my-temp

Final tasks, rebase branch `my-feature` to the branch `my-feature` and delete
the reference `my-temp`:

    git checkout my-feature
    git rebase my-temp
    git branch -d my-temp

The situation now looks like this:

    A---B---C  main
             \
              D---E---F---G'---H'---I'  my-feature

And that's what we wanted.

---

More use cases and recipes can be found
[here](https://michael.rollis.ch/myitjournal/gitandco/gitrecipes/#damn-i-branched-off-wrong-parent-branch)
and at a lot of more places all over the internet.

Commit message:

docs: add link to rebasing game

README.md, after:

# git-playground

This repo and its content has only one purpose: **to learn, to test and to
train git**. It does so by featuring pre-built branches with example content
laid out in a way that use cases can be played through before applying them to
the "real life" problems.

Additional content is very welcome. Just fork and create two new branches:

* One branch with changes this this README with the new use cases. This is then merge
  to `main` via a PR
* Another branch for the example data to work on if needed. This won't get merged
  but protected.

## Use Cases

### Clean Up Feature Branches

Working on a new feature on a feature branch is often a journey with hopefully
lots of commits to be able to try things and to go back if needed. There are
commits with new code, those that fix typos, with commits that partially revert
previous changes - over all - probably a medium to big mess. And hey, that's
perfectly fine. Nobody creates production code right away.

I hear you yelling: "But this messy branch gets merged using Squash and Merge
anyway! Then why bother at all?"

If all of the changes belong together and therefore are related, then you may be
correct, BUT even then, think about the person that has to dig through you
feature branch doing a review. 20 commits working on 15 files with multiple
changes on the same lines is a real burden for a reviewer and takes a lot of
time. At the very least, make the life of the reviewer easier and be a guidance
through your commit history. Commits like "fix typo", "add missing file" and the
like only distract the work for the reviewer. Clean it up and have a bunch of
meaningful commits that enables the reviewer discover the forest instead of the
individual tree. Sure, this is more work for you, the developer, but you know
your work in and out, the reviewer does not yet.

Find in this repo a branch `learn-rebasing-easy` to play around with interactive
rebasing. This tool allows you to rewrite the git history in every manner you
like. Please be aware, you are rewriting the history for everybody, so do this
only on work that others to not rely on. Typically, you only do this on your own
feature branches or on commits in `main` **that are not yet pushed to remote aka
made public**. But with branch protection on the `main` branch, this shouldn't
happen anyway. ;-)

**Task 1**: Go ahead, checkout `learn-rebasing-easy` and try to make the branch look
like this:

    A---B---C---D  learn-rebasing-easy

**Keep in mind**: Never ever rewrite history on branches/code that is already
published aka pushed and probably used by others.

There are [plenty of video tutorials on YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=git+rebasing)
about this topic, one short I like is [this one](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AFpqO_7LfjQ)
([typecraft_dev](https://www.youtube.com/@typecraft_dev) has a lot of interesting
sort videos, especially on Neovim).

In addition there's a [web-based game](https://learngitbranching.js.org/) to
practice rebasing.

### I Accidentally Committed to Wrong Branch

#### Symptom

You forgot to create the feature branch or to checkout the correct feature
branch and you now have created one or even several commits on the wrong branch,
probably `main`? Let's assume `main` for the cases below.  
How to get these commits over to the correct branch?

#### Discussion and Solution

We have to distinguish two cases here:

**Case 1:** If you forgot to create the new feature branch before working on the
new feature, things are simple to fix.

    A---B---C---D---E  main

Let's assume that commits D and E above should have gone into the feature branch
`my-feature`. So, we have to achieve that D and E go onto the new feature branch
and then `main` can be rolled back to C, right?

The current state above is actually already what you wanted on the feature
branch, rigth? Well, then let's check out this state as the new feature branch.

    git checkout -b my-feature

The repo now looks like this:

    A---B---C---D---E  main, my-feature

The only thing left to do is to remove D and E from `main` AKA roll back `main` by
two commits:

    git checkout main
    git reset --hard HEAD~2

Now, the repo looks like this - exactly what we wanted in the first place:

    A---B---C  main
             \
              D---E  my-feature

**Case 2**
Now, if the feature branch already exists and has work on it, we have to
append those wrong commits to the correct feature branch. It again makes sense
to distinguish two cases:

**a)** if you only have one commit that needs to be moved over, use cherry
picking:

    git log # remember the commit hash of the wrong commit
    git checkout my-feature
    git cherry-pick <commit hash>
    git checkout main
    git reset --hard HEAD~1    # or HEAD^, which is the same

**b)** You have several commits to get moved from one branch to another, use
`git rebase`. An example might look like this:

    A---B---C---G---H---I  main
             \
              D---E---E  my-feature

The changes in G, H and I should have been committed to the branch `my-feature`
instead of `main`. Damn!  
First create a temporary branch for these commits: `git checkout -b my-temp`

The situation now looks like this:

    A---B---C---G---H---I  main, my-temp
             \
              D---E---E  my-feature

Now reset `main` to where it should be, C in the example:

    git reset --hard HEAD~3

The situation now looks like this:

    A---B---C  main
            |\
            | G---H---I  my-temp
            |
             \
              D---E---F  my-feature

Now we can rebase the branch my-temp onto the branch my-feature:

    # First checkout the branch to move
    git co my-temp

    # Now rebse the current branch from the old the new branch:
    git rebase --onto my-feature main

The situation now looks like this:

    A---B---C  main
             \
              D---E---F  my-feature
                       \
                        G'---H'---I'  my-temp

Final tasks, rebase branch `my-feature` to the branch `my-feature` and delete
the reference `my-temp`:

    git checkout my-feature
    git rebase my-temp
    git branch -d my-temp

The situation now looks like this:

    A---B---C  main
             \
              D---E---F---G'---H'---I'  my-feature

And that's what we wanted.

---

More use cases and recipes can be found
[here](https://michael.rollis.ch/myitjournal/gitandco/gitrecipes/#damn-i-branched-off-wrong-parent-branch)
and at a lot of more places all over the internet.
